FreeCell Solitaire -=beta2=-

This Geos version is similar to the one that comes with Windows 9x.

Object of the Game - Move all the cards from the lower eight stacks 
to the four upper right stacks, building up in suit on the aces.

Moving Cards 
- All moves are made by left dragging the card you want to move. You can move cards onto the top cards of the lower eight stacks alternating colors and in decreasing order.  You have the four free cells in the upper left available to hold single cards.
- If the top card of one of the lower eight stacks will play on one of the upper right stacks you can double click it to send it there instead of dragging it.
- To check the suit of an ace that has cards covering it just left click on it.  It will become fully visible and remain so for about 3/4s of a second.
- The game will let you move multiple cards under certain conditions:
 -- All the cards on top of the selected card must be in descending order and alternating color, AND
 -- There must be enough empty spaces to move that number of cards as if you had moved them one at a time
- You may never move or have more than one card on any of the free cells.
- You can undo a move by selecting Undo from the Game menu.  Note that the undo goes back only one move - no multiple undos.  That would be too much like cheating, right?

Restarting a Game - If you get stuck and wish to replay the same game you may do so by selecting Redeal from the Game menu.

Options - In the Options menu you may change how the cards are dragged (outline or full card) and the color of the playing surface.  These are saved automatically and will be restored after exiting the game and starting it again.

Changes from beta 1 to beta 2
 - Game's opening size is fitted to the size of the palying area
 - You can move more than one card at a time (see Moving Cards above)
 - You can check the suit of a covered Ace
 - Selectable table color
 - Automatically saved options

I have had one request to have the game keep statistics (as in the Win versions - wins, losses, streaks, etc).  Other than that, an icon and a help file, is there anything else needed or desired?

Please send bugs, comments, suggestions, etc to me at johnh@breadbox.com

John ;-)

**** from Tim Harvey
Possible bug - the last King transfers to the correct
stack but also stays on the playing area when the
"Play another game?" option box comes up. (Not sure
how frequently this happens - I don't win that often!)


Yup - I need to clean up the playing board at the end of the game.

but cleaning up seems to force a redraw of the new board as the app is closing


FEATURE REQUESTS



3. Auto-finish. Double-clicking on *every* card at the
finish is pretty tedious when you might have thirty or
forty cards to go through!


Yup - good idea and fairly easy to implement.



4. How about a bigger celebration on completion? Like
the cards falling down and bouncing around the playing
area like in the screen saver "Pieces" or in Windows
Solitaire? I mean even the Crossword puzzle manages
more than the current terse dialogue box now
(fireworks no less!) - even Solitaire manages to
change the card backs!


Hehe - those nice touches generally aren't available in early betas [;-)]   And since you never see the card backs in FreeCell you can't tell whether the cards have the Trophy backs after a win!  I'll add some celebration [:-)]



5. With respect to the pop-up aces: could this feature
be extended to viewing all cards, please? It would
somehow have to folded in with dragging, but it's hard
to see the card you are after when all but the number
and colour is hidden.


Well, the reason I implemented this feature for aces was that you can't tell the suit of a covered ace, but you can see the top half of every other card's pips.  I'll see if there is any way to do this (maybe with a right click) but it would be pretty low on the todo list.


****